README.md, before:

# Mongoproxy the Observable
There are many MongoDb proxies, but this one is about observability. It passes bytes between client and the server and keeps track of latencies, response sizes, document counts and exposes them as Prometheus metrics. It also does Jaeger tracing if the client passes a trace id in the `$comment` field of the operation.

All bytes are passed through unchanged.

## Current state
Supports MongoDb 3.6 and greater (`OP_MSG` protocol), and produces throughput and latency metrics both at the network and document level. The legacy `OP_COMMAND` protocol used by some drivers and older Mongo versions is not fully supported. The proxy won't crash or anything but the collected metrics will be limited.

Performance overhead is minimal. In sidecar mode, expect to add 3-5% CPU to the Pod and a sub 1ms increase to the latency (proportional to response size). Memory usage depends on the max request/response size (currently needs to have the whole BSON in memory for parsing) and number of active connections. For most well-behaved apps the memory usage should be around few tens of MBs, however I've seen it go up to 100MB with some workloads.

Since it uses a thread per connection, `MALLOC_ARENA_MAX` needs to be tuned to avoid excessive memory usage due to how `malloc()` handles per-thread arenas. 2 is a good starting value.

Jaeger tracing is still experimental. It does generate traces, but the interface is likely to change in the future. Specifically, the `$comment` field could be used for passing along other information as well (eg. additional Prometheus labels, function name, file:line, etc.).

## Usage

### Sidecar with iptables port forwarding
```
mongoproxy --proxy 27111
```

This mode is used when running the proxy as a sidecar on a K8s pod. `iptables` rules need to be set up to redirect all port 27017 traffic through the proxy. The proxy then determines the original destination address via `getsockopt` and forwards the requests to its original destination. Because it captures all traffic to Mongo ports, it automatically supports replicaset connections.

See the [manually added](examples/sidecar) or [automatically injected](examples/k8s-sidecar-injector) sidecar examples.

### Static server address
```
mongoproxy --proxy 27113:localhost:27017
```
This will proxy all requests on port `27113` to the MongoDb instance running on `localhost:27017`. Useful when running as a shared front-proxy. However this mode does not easily support replica sets, as replicaset connections can be redirected to any host in the set.

See the [front proxy](examples/front-proxy) example.

### With Jaeger tracing
```
mongoproxy --proxy 27113:localhost:27017 \
    --service-name mongoproxy-ftw \
    --enable-jaeger \
    --jaeger-addr localhost:6831
```

Same as above but with Jaeger tracing enabled. Spans will be sent to collector on `localhost:6831`. The service name for the traces is set to `mongoproxy-ftw`.

Running with `--enable-jaeger` adds some overhead as the full query text is parsed and tagged to the trace. 

### Other tips
More verbose logging can be enabled by specifying `RUST_LOG` level as `info` or `debug`. Add `RUST_BACKTRACE=1` for troubleshooting those (rare) crashes.

## Metrics

Per-request histograms:
* `mongoproxy_response_latency_seconds` - Response latency
* `mongoproxy_documents_returned_total` - How many documents were returned.
* `mongoproxy_documents_changed_total` - How many documents were changed by insert, update or delete.
* `mongoproxy_server_response_bytes_total` - Response size distribution.

All per-request metrics are labeled with `client` (IP address), `app` (appName from connection metadata), `op`, `collection`, `db`, `server` and `replicaset`. 

Connection counters
* `mongoproxy_client_connections_established_total`
* `mongoproxy_client_bytes_sent_total`
* `mongoproxy_client_bytes_received_total`
* `mongoproxy_client_disconnections_total`
* `mongoproxy_client_connection_errors_total`

Per connection metrics are only labeled with `client`.

Example:

![Metrics example](https://github.com/mpihlak/mongoproxy/blob/master/img/metrics.png)

## Tracing
Mongoproxy will not create tracing spans unless the application explicitly requests it. The application does this by passing the trace id in the `$comment` field of the MongoDb query. So, for example if a `find` operation has `uber-trace-id:6d697c0f076183c:6d697c0f076183c:0:1` in the comment, the proxy picks this up and will create a child span for the `find` operation. Like this:

![Trace example](https://github.com/mpihlak/mongoproxy/blob/master/img/trace.png)

Commit message:

Note about port redirection for front-proxy

README.md, after:

# Mongoproxy the Observable
There are many MongoDb proxies, but this one is about observability. It passes bytes between client and the server and keeps track of latencies, response sizes, document counts and exposes them as Prometheus metrics. It also does Jaeger tracing if the client passes a trace id in the `$comment` field of the operation.

All bytes are passed through unchanged.

## Current state
Supports MongoDb 3.6 and greater (`OP_MSG` protocol), and produces throughput and latency metrics both at the network and document level. The legacy `OP_COMMAND` protocol used by some drivers and older Mongo versions is not fully supported. The proxy won't crash or anything but the collected metrics will be limited.

Performance overhead is minimal. In sidecar mode, expect to add 3-5% CPU to the Pod and a sub 1ms increase to the latency (proportional to response size). Memory usage depends on the max request/response size (currently needs to have the whole BSON in memory for parsing) and number of active connections. For most well-behaved apps the memory usage should be around few tens of MBs, however I've seen it go up to 100MB with some workloads.

Since it uses a thread per connection, `MALLOC_ARENA_MAX` needs to be tuned to avoid excessive memory usage due to how `malloc()` handles per-thread arenas. 2 is a good starting value.

Jaeger tracing is still experimental. It does generate traces, but the interface is likely to change in the future. Specifically, the `$comment` field could be used for passing along other information as well (eg. additional Prometheus labels, function name, file:line, etc.).

## Usage

### Sidecar with iptables port forwarding
```
mongoproxy --proxy 27111
```

This mode is used when running the proxy as a sidecar on a K8s pod. `iptables` rules need to be set up to redirect all port 27017 traffic through the proxy. The proxy then determines the original destination address via `getsockopt` and forwards the requests to its original destination. Because it captures all traffic to Mongo ports, it automatically supports replicaset connections.

See the [manually added](examples/sidecar) or [automatically injected](examples/k8s-sidecar-injector) sidecar examples.

### Static server address
```
mongoproxy --proxy 27113:localhost:27017
```
This will proxy all requests on port `27113` to the MongoDb instance running on `localhost:27017`. Useful when running as a shared front-proxy. See the [front proxy](examples/front-proxy) for a basic example.

Note that this mode does not easily support replica sets, as replicaset connections can be redirected to any host in the set. To work around this, the proxy needs to run on each of the replicaset nodes and intercept incoming port 27017 traffic. For example, with iptables:

`iptables -t nat -A PREROUTING -i ${IFACE} -p tcp --dport ${MONGO_PORT} -j REDIRECT --to-port ${PROXY_PORT}`

### With Jaeger tracing
```
mongoproxy --proxy 27113:localhost:27017 \
    --service-name mongoproxy-ftw \
    --enable-jaeger \
    --jaeger-addr localhost:6831
```

Same as above but with Jaeger tracing enabled. Spans will be sent to collector on `localhost:6831`. The service name for the traces is set to `mongoproxy-ftw`.

Running with `--enable-jaeger` adds some overhead as the full query text is parsed and tagged to the trace. 

### Other tips
More verbose logging can be enabled by specifying `RUST_LOG` level as `info` or `debug`. Add `RUST_BACKTRACE=1` for troubleshooting those (rare) crashes.

## Metrics

Per-request histograms:
* `mongoproxy_response_latency_seconds` - Response latency
* `mongoproxy_documents_returned_total` - How many documents were returned.
* `mongoproxy_documents_changed_total` - How many documents were changed by insert, update or delete.
* `mongoproxy_server_response_bytes_total` - Response size distribution.

All per-request metrics are labeled with `client` (IP address), `app` (appName from connection metadata), `op`, `collection`, `db`, `server` and `replicaset`. 

Connection counters
* `mongoproxy_client_connections_established_total`
* `mongoproxy_client_bytes_sent_total`
* `mongoproxy_client_bytes_received_total`
* `mongoproxy_client_disconnections_total`
* `mongoproxy_client_connection_errors_total`

Per connection metrics are only labeled with `client`.

Example:

![Metrics example](https://github.com/mpihlak/mongoproxy/blob/master/img/metrics.png)

## Tracing
Mongoproxy will not create tracing spans unless the application explicitly requests it. The application does this by passing the trace id in the `$comment` field of the MongoDb query. So, for example if a `find` operation has `uber-trace-id:6d697c0f076183c:6d697c0f076183c:0:1` in the comment, the proxy picks this up and will create a child span for the `find` operation. Like this:

![Trace example](https://github.com/mpihlak/mongoproxy/blob/master/img/trace.png)
